.TH SSHUTOUT 8 "05 December 2009"
.SH NAME
sshutout \- A Daemon to Stop SSH Dictionary Attacks
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsshutout\fP \fI[-d delay] [-f config_file] [-i poll_interval]\fP
.ti 2i
\fI[-l input_log_file] [-p pid_file] [-s output_log_file]\fP
.ti 2i
\fI[-t threshold] [-w host_list] [-?] [-2] [-D] [-e] [-u]\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
\fBsshutout\fP is a Linux daemon that periodically monitors log files 
looking for multiple failed login attempts via the Secure Shell daemon (sshd, or 
optionally, sshd2). The daemon is meant to mitigate what are commonly known as 
a "dictionary attacks," i.e. scripted brute force attacks that use lists of 
user ID's and passwords to effect unauthorized intrusions. Typically such attacks 
fill the system logs with hundreds or even thousands of log entries for the failed 
login attempts. Aside from the nuisance of wasted space, wasted bandwidth, and 
reduced signal to noise ratio in the logs, the attacks can pose a real danger to 
systems with weak ID and password combinations.
.P
The sshutout daemon blunts such attacks by creating firewall rules to block individual 
offenders from accessing the system. These rules are created when an attack signature 
is detected, and after a configurable expiry interval has elapsed, the rules are deleted.
.P
.SS CONFIGURATION
The daemon can be configured by using a configuration file (typically /etc/sshutout.conf)
and/or using command line options. The command line options are as follows:
.TP
.B -2
Use the defaults for the sshd2 daemon. Currently, this sets the ssh_daemon to "sshd2" and the sshd_log_file
to "/var/log/secure"
.TP
.B -D
Do not daemonize, i.e. run as a normal process attached to a terminal.
.TP
.BI "-d " "delay_penalty"
Takes a numeric argument giving the number of seconds to block the attacking host
at the firewall.
.TP
.B -e
Turns off auto whitelisting of default route and name servers.
.TP
.BR "-f " "\fIsshd_log_file\fP"
Requires an argument specifying the path to the input log file, typically one of:
.P
.ti 2i
/var/log/messages [default]
.ti 2i
/var/log/secure
.ti 2i
/var/log/auth.log
.TP
.BI "-i " "polling_interval"
Takes a numeric argument specifying the polling_interval which determines how often the
the sshd_log_file is sampled for attack signatures.
.TP
.BR "-l " "\fIsshd_log_file\fP"
Requires an argument specifying a path name to the input log file (sshd_log_file)
that is scanned for attack signatures.
.TP
.B -P
Enables the option to block probes of the sshd port, i.e. block hosts which cause the ssh daemon
to log these types of messages:
.P
.ti 2i
"Did not receive identification string from..."
.TP
.BR "-p " "\fIpid_file\fP"
Requires an argument specifying an alternate path to the output PID file where the Process
ID number is stored. The default PID file is:
.P
.ti 2i
/var/run/sshutout.pid
.TP
.BR "-s " "\fIsshutout_log_file\fP"
Requires an argument specifying an alternate path to the output log file. The default
log file is:
.P
.ti 2i
/var/log/sshutout.log
.TP
.BI "-t " "threshold"
Takes a numeric argument specifying the threshold value for the number of failed login attempts
that will trigger a blocking rule at the firewall.
.TP
.B -u
Turn on sensitivity to "Illegal/Invalid user" attempts.
.TP
.BI "-w " "host[,host]..."
Takes a comma separated list of one or more hosts specified either as a resolvable host name or,
more preferably, in IPv4 dotted quad notation.
Specified hosts are added to the whitelist of host addresses that are exempt from firewall blocking.
.TP
.B -?
Help.
Give a brief description of the command syntax.
.SS CONFIGURATION FILE
A sample configuration file (typically found at /etc/sshutout.conf) is shown below:
.P
.nf

-----------------<<< CUT >>>-------------------

# Sample configuration file for the sshutout daemon.
# The (commented out) values shown below are
# the defaults if not specifically overridden
# in the configuration file or on the 
# command line.

# The polling interval is given in seconds and determine how often
# the ssh log is examined. Range 30 - 300

#polling_interval = 60

# The delay penalty is given in seconds and specifies how long the
# firewall rule should remain effective. Range 60 - 86400

#delay_penalty = 300

# The threshold value gives how many failed login attempts will trigger a
# block at the firewall. Value >= 3

#threshold = 4

# The following parameter gives the name of the file that is scanned for
# ssh login attempts. Typical values are:
#
#     /var/log/messages  (default)
#     /var/log/secure
#     /var/log/auth.log
#
# Consult your Linux distribution for the correct setting.

#sshd_log_file = /var/log/messages

# The next parameter gives the name of the file where attacker
# IP addresses are logged.

#sshutout_log_file = /var/log/sshutout.log

# This parameter gives the name of the ssh daemon that we are
# monitoring. Openssh names its daemon, "sshd", while
# ssh.com's daemon is named, "sshd2" 
# Legal values are restricted to sshd or sshd2

#ssh_daemon = sshd

# The sshutout daemon process' PID is stored in this file.

#pid_file = /var/run/sshutout.pid

# The whitelist value is specified as a comma separated list of IPv4
# addresses (dotted quad or host name) which will be ignored by
# the daemon, i.e. they are never firewalled by the daemon.
# During normal operation, the default route, name servers, and
# addresses of all active interfaces are automatically part
# of this whitelist, so they don't need to be specified here. 
# Example: whitelist = 12.13.14.15, 120.20.101.30, slashdot.org 

#whitelist = 

# Enabled by default, this parameter automatically whitelists 
# the default gateway and name servers.
# Valid values (case insensitive):
#	y, n, yes, no, 1, 0, t, f, true, false, on, off

#auto_whitelist = yes

# Should we firewall portscans seen by ssh daemon, 
# i.e. those hosts whose probes leave those 
# "Did not receive identification string from..." messages? (default no)
# Valid values (case insensitive):
#	y, n, yes, no, 1, 0, t, f, true, false, on, off

#squelch_portscan = no

# Should we monitor and count "Illegal user" or "Invalid user" attempts
# as well as failed logins? Valid values (case insensitive):
#	y, n, yes, no, 1, 0, t, f, true, false, on, off

#illegal_user = no

-----------------<<< CUT >>>-------------------
.P
.SH ENVIRONMENT
\fBsshutout\fP is written to run as a daemon process within a GNU/Linux environment and assumes that it has
superuser authority. It also assumes that the machine has been configured to use
iptables as its firewall. Finally, the daemon will attempt to locate the \fBiptables\fP and \fBifconfig\fP
commands as it makes use of these during its operations.
.SH FILES
.nf
iptables
ifconfig
/proc/net/route
/etc/resolv.conf
/etc/sshutout.conf
/var/run/sshutout.pid
/var/log/sshutout.log
/var/log/messages
/var/log/secure
/var/log/auth.log
.SH SEE ALSO
sshd(8), iptables(8), ifconfig(8)
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Bill DuPree
bdupree@techfinesse.com
.SH BUGS
Probably.
